feat(frontend):add guide for strict typescript settings (#12506)
getsentry/sentry-docs: develop-docs/frontend/strict-typescript-settings-guide.mdx

---

> title: Strict TypeScript settings guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Strict TypeScript Settings Guide
```

sidebar_order: 75
---

## Introduction

> We have recently turned on more strict compiler settings in the TypeScript compiler, including [noUncheckedIndexedAccess](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUncheckedIndexedAccess) and [noImplicitAny](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noImplicitAny). While those settings should make it easier to write safe code in the future, it's not always clear how to proceed with existing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have recently turned on stricter settings in the TypeScript compiler, including [noUncheckedIndexedAccess](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUncheckedIndexedAccess) and [noImplicitAny](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noImplicitAny). While those settings should make it easier to write safe code in the future, it's not always clear how to proceed with existing code.
```

> This guide aims at explaining the most common situations & pitfalls and how to fix & avoid them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide aims at explaining the most common situations and pitfalls, as well as how to fix and avoid them.
```

> ## Missing type annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Missing Type Annotations
```

`noImplicitAny` has surfaced a lot of missing type annotations, where the compiler has automatically filled in an `any` type for us. Simple example from a react component:

```tsx
// ❌
const handleClick = (e) => {
  e.stopPropagation()
  props.onClick()
}
```

> Here, we didn't see any error without this compiler setting, but now we get:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we didn't see any errors with the old compiler settings, but now we get:
```

<Alert level="warning">
  Parameter 'e' implicitly has an 'any' type.
</Alert>

> In the migration, we addressed many of those problems by just adding an explicit any:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the migration, we addressed many of those problems by just adding an explicit `any`:
```

```tsx {2}
// ⚠️
const handleClick = (e: any) => {
  e.stopPropagation()
  props.onClick()
}
```

> This is obviously not great, but since we had 3k+ errors, this was the fastest way to get this setting to be turned on. So there's a good chance you'll see many explicit any type annotations now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This obviously isn't great, but since we had 3k+ errors, this was the fastest way to get this setting up and running. So there's a good chance you'll see many explicit `any` type annotations now.
```

> ### Recommended approaches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended Approaches
```

> - Sometimes, it's enough to change `any` to `unknown` (given that enough type narrowing happens inside the function). `unknown` is totally safe to use, and if you have no errors, this is a good way forward. The above example is not one of them though.

Reviewer: It might be worth a quick explanation of the difference between `any` and `unknown` in TypeScript (or a link to an explanation); also, can we explain why the above example isn't a good candidate for `unknown`?

Author: did that here: bcd6b6d3

also renamed `e` to `event` because I had to use it again in a sentence and it felt better.

> - Look at the usages of the function and potentially inline it into one of those usages while removing the manual `:any`. You can then check via type inference what the type of e would be in that usage. You can then give it an explicit type, in this case: `React.MouseEvent<HTMLButtonElement>`

Reviewer: 'type of e' seems like a typo here, what should 'e' be?

Author: from the example above, `e` is the event that is passed to the event handler, which is currently typed as `any`:

```
const handleClick = (e: any) => {
```

I’ve added a code block around the variable to better distinguish this:

ca748527

alternatively, I could also rename it to `event` if you prefer.

```tsx {diff} {2}
// ✅
- const handleClick = (e: any) => {
+ const handleClick = (e: React.MouseEvent<HTMLButtonElement>) => {
  e.stopPropagation()
  props.onClick()
}
```

## Missing handling for array indexed access

`noUncheckedIndexedAccess` has revealed many cases where we "know" an element exists in an Array, but TypeScript does not know it.

> ### for loops

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### For Loops
```

Inside of for loops, the access of elements is usually safe, because the index is checked. However, TypeScript doesn't know that, so we need the `!` operator:

```ts {3}
// ❌
for (let i = 0; i < collection.length; i++) {
  const child = collection[i]!;
  // ...
}
```

#### `for..of`

The easiest fix is to convert this to a `for..of` loop:

```ts
// ✅
for (const child of collection) {
  // ...
}
```

There is also a stylistic [typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/prefer-for-of/) rule that can catch those cases, as this arguably easier to read, too.

> #### functional access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Functional Access
```

Another approach would be to switch to a more functional style, like `collection.map` or `collection.forEach`:

```ts
// ✅
collection.forEach(child => {
 // ...
})
```

If this is a good approach depends on what's actually happening in the body of the function, and if performance is a concern and the collection itself is large, the loop might be the better approach.

> ### Accessing a specific element of an array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Accessing a Specific Element of an Array
```

> Oftentimes, we need to access a specific element, mostly the first element, of an array after we've checked the length:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oftentimes, we need to access a specific element, usually the first element, of an array after we've checked the length:
```

```ts
// ❌
if (collection.length > 0) {
  const first = collection[0]!;
  // ...
}
```

There are various ways to address this:

> #### Explicit item check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Explicit Item Check
```

We could check for existence of the item itself instead of checking for the length:

```ts {3}
// ✅
const first = collection[0]
if (first) {
  // ...
}
```

`first` will be properly narrowed here, but note that the `if` check is not 100% identical to a length check. If the array contains `[null]` or `[undefined]` at the first index, we would pass the length check, but not the "existence check".

> #### Optional chaining

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Optional Chaining
```

We could not check the length at all and just embrace that `first` is potentially `undefined` and just continue with optional chaining:

```ts
// ✅
const first = collection[0]
first?.toUpperCase()
```

> #### use `as const` for static elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use `as const` for Static Elements
```

Sometimes, we know that `collection[0]` exists because we have manually defined it:

```ts
// ❌
const collection = ['hello', 'world']
const first = collection[0]!
```

In this case, accessing `collection[0]` is likely safe, but TypeScript doesn't know that. Arrays can be mutated later, so an `Array<string>` is not guaranteed to have those two elements.

The fix is to add `as const` to the definition. Const assertions are very powerful - they make sure that the most narrow type possible is inferred, and they also make the collection `readonly` (immutable):

```ts {diff}
- const collection = ['hello', 'world']
+ const collection = ['hello', 'world'] as const
const first = collection[0]
```

> #### use a type-narrowing length check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use a Type-Narrowing Length Check
```

> Especially for checking the first element, which is arguably the most common case, having a descriptive helper function that checks if lists are "non empty" is possible to implement at runtime and on type level with a user-defined type-guard:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Especially for checking the first element, which is arguably the most common case, having a descriptive helper function that checks if lists are "non-empty" is possible to implement at runtime and on type level with a user-defined type-guard:
```

```ts

type NonEmptyArray<T> = readonly [T, ...ReadonlyArray<T>]

export const isNonEmpty = <T,>(
  array: ReadonlyArray<T> | undefined,
): array is NonEmptyArray<T> => !!array && array.length > 0;
```

Since this user-defined type-guard will narrow our array to be a NonEmptyArray, we can now continue to use a length check as before:

```ts
// ✅
if (isNonEmpty(collection)) {
  const first = collection[0];
  // ...
}
```

> ## Iterating over indexed objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Iterating Over Indexed Objects
```

> Iterating over every item in an object has similar drawbacks of a for loop. Traditionally, code may look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iterating over every item in an object has similar drawbacks to a for loop. Traditionally, code may look like this:
```

```ts
interface Person {
  firstName: string,
  lastName: string
}
```

Similar to the error seen when [Iterating over indexed objects](#iterating-over-indexed-objects), iterating over those objects with `Object.keys` won't work:

```ts
// ❌
function print(person: Person) {
  Object.keys(person).forEach(key => {
    console.log(person[key])
  })
}
```

And we also can't do lookups with arbitrary string keys:

```
// ❌
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(person[key])
}
```

The error we are getting in these situations is:

<Alert level="warning">
TS7053: Element implicitly has an any type because expression of type string can't be used to index type Person

No index signature with a parameter of type string was found on type Person
</Alert>

While this is similar to the error before, it can't easily be solved with a non-null assertion - it's not even solvable with `key as any`. Typescript simply won't allow accessing a seemingly random key on an object that doesn't have an index signature.

How we address this problem depends on our intent:

> ### Strict lookups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Strict Lookups
```

The easiest way is to disallow lookups by `string`. If we change our `printKey` function to accept a more narrow index type:

```ts
// ✅
function printKey(person: Person, key: keyof Person) {
  console.log(person[key]);
}
```

Of course, this might lead to errors on the call-sides if we have strings there that might potentially not be a valid key.

> ### Fallback lookups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fallback Lookups
```

Sometimes, we want to allow arbitrary strings to be passed in, e.g. because we get them from an endpoint that is typed as `string`. In those cases, we might want to just leverage that JavaScript will return `undefined` at runtime:

```ts
// ❌
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(person[key]?.toUpperCase() ?? 'N/A');
}
```

While this works fine at runtime and is also quite easy to read and understand, TypeScript doesn't like it, and there is no easy way to narrow `key`. A type assertion might help:

```ts
// ⚠️
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(person[key as keyof Person]?.toUpperCase() ?? 'N/A');
}
```

But it has the drawback that the optional chaining might be seen as unnecessary by tools like `eslint`. That's because `person[key as keyof Person]` returns `string`, not `string | undefined`. The correct type assertion would be quite verbose:

```tsx
// ✅
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(
    (person[key as keyof Person] as string | undefined)?.toUpperCase() ?? 'N/A'
  );
}
```

so I don't think we want that littered in our code-base.

> ### Narrowing with the `in` operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Narrowing With the `in` Operator
```

The `in` operator is good for checks at runtime, and it also narrows the type correctly if we check for a hard-coded field. However, it can't narrow for arbitrary strings like `key:string` , so this also won't work:

```ts
// ❌
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(key in person ? person[key].toUpperCase() : 'N/A');
}
```

We need to assert the key here again, but at least this time, the assertion would be safe:

```ts
// ✅
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(key in person ? person[key as keyof Person].toUpperCase() : 'N/A');
}
```

This pattern seems like the best approach, if we apply it sparingly. If we need it more often, a `hasKey` helper function to narrow keys might be a good idea:

```ts
 const hasKey = <T extends Record<PropertyKey, any>>(
    obj: T,
    key: PropertyKey
  ): key is keyof typeof obj => {
    return key in obj;
  };
```

With this, we could do:

```ts
// ✅
function printKey(person: Person, key: string) {
  console.log(hasKey(person, key) ? person[key].toUpperCase() : 'N/A');
}
```

Which isn't terrible.

> ## Partial object lookup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Partial Object Lookup
```

```ts
const PRODUCTS = {
  [DataCategory.ERRORS]: 'Error Monitoring',
  [DataCategory.TRANSACTIONS]: 'Performance Monitoring',
  [DataCategory.REPLAYS]: 'Session Replay',
  [DataCategory.PROFILES]: 'Profiling',
  [DataCategory.MONITOR_SEATS]: 'Crons',
  [DataCategory.ATTACHMENTS]: 'Attachments',
  [DataCategory.SPANS]: 'Spans',
};
```

We then might reasonably accept that we could access `Products` with a variable that is of type `DataCategory`

```ts
// ❌
function getProduct(category: DataCategory) {
  return PRODUCTS[category];
}
```

But `PRODUCTS` doesn't contain all DataCategories - it's not exhaustive. We're getting the following error:

```ts
// ❌
function getProduct(category: DataCategory) {
  return PRODUCTS[category];
}
```

<Alert level="warning">
TS7053: Element implicitly has an any type because expression of type DataCategory can't be used to index type

Property '[DataCategory. PROFILE_DURATION]' does not exist on type ...
</Alert>

> ### Solution 1: Make the mapping exhaustive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solution 1: Make the Mapping Exhaustive
```

If our intention was to have an exhaustive mapping - every `DataCategory` should be in the `PRODUCTS`, we should ensure this with `satisfies`:

```tsx {10}
// ✅
const PRODUCTS = {
  [DataCategory.ERRORS]: 'Error Monitoring',
  [DataCategory.TRANSACTIONS]: 'Performance Monitoring',
  [DataCategory.REPLAYS]: 'Session Replay',
  [DataCategory.PROFILES]: 'Profiling',
  [DataCategory.MONITOR_SEATS]: 'Crons',
  [DataCategory.ATTACHMENTS]: 'Attachments',
  [DataCategory.SPANS]: 'Spans',
} satisfies Record<DataCategory, string>;
```

This will give us a good error in the right place if our enum grows:

<Alert level="warning">
TS1360: Type ... does not satisfy the expected type `Record<DataCategory, string>`

Type ... is missing the following properties from type `Record<DataCategory, string>`: profileDuration, spansIndexed, profileChunks
</Alert>

> ### Solution 2: Define the object as `Partial`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solution 2: Define the Object as `Partial`
```

If our intention was to not have all `DataCategories` mapped, we have to define our mapping object as `Partial`:

```tsx
// ✅
const PRODUCTS: Partial<Record<DataCategory, string>> = {
 // ...
}
```

Accessing with a `DataCategory` will then be possible, however, accessing *any field* will return `string | undefined`. This isn't great if we know that we've put a certain key into our mapping and we're accessing it statically, e.g. in tests:

```tsx
// ❌
const errorProduct = PRODUCTS[DataCategory.ERRORS].toUpperCase()
```

This won't work because we might be accessing `.toUpperCase()` on `undefined` , e.g. if we remove `DataCategory.ERRORS` from our Partial mapping.

> For tests, `!` might be good enough, but for runtime code, just embracing the fact that no category is guaranteed to be in the mapping is likely best, so let's use optional chaining then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For tests, `!` might be good enough, but for runtime code, just embracing the fact that no category is guaranteed to be in the mapping is likely best, so we recommend optional chaining:
```
